>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, JANUARY 3:
SUICIDE BOMBERS KILL AT LEAST 15
IRAQI SECURITY FORCES AT A BASE
NEAR TIKRIT.
ISIS CLAIMS RESPONSIBILITY.
OREGON PLANS AHEAD TO TRAIN THE
NEXT GENERATION OF AMERICAN BLUE
COLLAR WORKERS.
AND FAREWELL TO "DOWNTON ABBEY".
PBS' MOST POPULAR DRAMA EVER
BEGINS ITS FINAL SEASON TONIGHT.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: SUICIDE BOMBERS
FROM THE ISLAMIC STATE IN IRAQ
AND SYRIA, OR ISIS, HAVE KILLED
15 IRAQI SECURITY FORCES AND
WOUNDED 22 OTHERS AT AN IRAQI
MILITARY BASE NORTH OF BAGHDAD.
TODAY'S ATTACK HAPPENED AT CAMP
SPEICHER, A FORMER U.S. BASE
OUTSIDE TIKRIT, WHERE IRAQ IS
TRAINING POLICE AND SOLDIERS.
FIVE SUICIDE BOMBERS WERE
INVOLVED.
TWO DETONATED CAR BOMBS AT A
CAMP GATE, WHILE THREE OTHERS
ENTERED THE CAMP AND BLEW
THEMSELVES UP INSIDE.
IN AN ONLINE STATEMENT, ISIS
SAID IT TARGETED TRAINERS FROM
WHAT IT CALLED THE "REJECTIONIST
ARMY."
IRAQ'S DEFENSE MINISTRY SAID
ISIS HAS STEPPED UP SUICIDE
ATTACKS SINCE LOSING CONTROL OF
THE IRAQI CITY OF RAMADI LAST
WEEK.
THE U.S. STATE DEPARTMENT IS
CALLING ON IRAN TO PROTECT THE
SAUDI EMBASSY IN TEHRAN AFTER
PROTESTERS SET FIRE TO IT LAST
NIGHT AND STORMED A SAUDI
CONSULATE IN MASHAD, IRAN'S
SECOND LARGEST CITY.
IRANIAN PRESIDENT HASSAN ROUHANI
SAID THOSE ACTIONS WERE "NOT
JUSTIFIABLE," AND IRANIAN POLICE
HAVE ARRESTED 40 PEOPLE.
THE PROTESTS WERE IN RESPONSE TO
SAUDI ARABIA'S MASS EXECUTION
YESTERDAY OF 47 PEOPLE,
INCLUDING A LEADING SHIITE
MUSLIM CLERIC, NIMR-AL NIMR.
IRAN'S SUPREME LEADER, AYATOLLAH
ALI KHAMENEI, CALLED NIMR'S
EXECUTION A CRIME CARRIED OUT BY
"TYRANTS" WHO WILL FACE A
"DIVINE REVENGE."
>> (translated): THE
POLITICIANS, EXECUTIVES AND
POLICYMAKERS OF THE SAUDI
GOVERNMENT SHOULD HAVE NO DOUBT
THAT THIS BLOOD WILL CATCH UP
WITH THEM, AND IT WILL GIVE THEM
HELL.
ALMIGHTY GOD WILL NOT IGNORE
BLOOD OF THE INNOCENT.
>> Sreenivasan: IN RESPONSE TO
THE HEATED RHETORIC AND
RANSACKING OF ITS EMBASSY, SAUDI
ARABIA LATE SUNDAY ANNOUNCED IT
IS SEVERING DIPLOMATIC TIES WITH
IRAN.
IT SAYS IT WILL EXPEL IRANIAN
DIPLOMATS FOR UNDERMINING SAUDI
SECURITY AND WITHDRAW ITS OWN
PERSONNEL FROM IRAN.
JOINING ME NOW TO DISCUSS THE
REACTION TO THE MASS EXECUTIONS
IN SAUDI ARABIA AND ALSO THE
ONGOING CONFLICT IN IRAQ IS
"WASHINGTON POST" REPORTER LIZ
SLY.
SHE JOINS ME BY SKYPE FROM
BEIRUT.
LET'S TALK FIRST ABOUT
THE SAUDI ARABIAN EXECUTIONS
THAT WE TALKED ABOUT YESTERDAY,
WE REPORTED ABOUT, THE REACTION
IN IRAN HAS BEEN VERY, VERY
STRONG ONE.
WHAT IS TO MAKE OF THIS?
>> IRAN HAD WARNED SAUDI ARABIA
ON A NUMBER OF OCCASIONS NOT TO
EXECUTE SHEIKH NIMR SO IT WAS
REALLY QUITE PREDICTABLE THAT
THEY WOULD RESPOND IN THIS WAY
WHEN THEY DID CARRY OUT THE
EXECUTION.
AND I THINK TODAY WE'RE SEEING
THINGS CALM DOWN JUST A LITTLE
BIT.
THEY'VE ORDERED THE POLICE INTO
ACTION AROUND THE SAUDI EMBASSY.
THEY ROUNDED UP AND ARRESTED
SOME OF THE PROTESTORS.
AND IT COULD BE THAT AFTER THIS
OUTBURST OF RAGE THAT WE'VE SEEN
THINGS WILL TAMP DOWN A LITTLE
BIT.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT STD U.S.
STATE DEPARTMENT'S ROLE THERE?
>> IT'S A BIT UNCLEAR WHAT ROLE
THEY HAVE BEEN PLAYING.
THEY HAVE NEVER ACTUALLY CALLED
ON SAUDI ARABIA NOT TO EXECUTE
THIS MAN.
AND THEY DID NOT SPECIFICALLY
CONDEMN THE EXECUTION YESTERDAY.
THEY URGED SAUDI ARABIA TO
RESPECT-- THEY ALSO URGED SAUDI
ARABIA TO ALLOW THE PEACEFUL
EXPRESSION OF DISSENT WHICH IS
THE REFERENCE TO THE LIKELY
DEMONSTRATIONS OF SUPPORT FOR
NIMR THAT THEY WERE LIKELY TO
SEE AMONG SHIA IN SAUDI ARABIA.
BUT THEY DID NOT GO SO FAR AS TO
CONDEMN THE EXECUTION.
AND IN THE PAST WHEN THEY HAVE
BEEN QUESTIONED AT THE STATE
DEPARTMENT BY REPORTERS ABOUT
WHAT THEY THINK ABOUT THE ABOUT
THIS EXECUTION, THEY AVOIDED
CALLING FOR SAUDI ARABIA NOT TO
DO IT.
>> LET'S ALSO TALK ABOUT THE
OTHER STORY YOU HAVE BEEN
WORKING ON.
WE TALKED ABOUT ATTACKS IN
TIKRIT, YESTERDAY IN RAMADI.
THIS AFTER FORCES HAVE JUST
RETAKEN CONTROL OF THE CITY.
>> YES, WE SAW A LOT OF ATTACKS
ON FRIDAY, A LOT OF ATTACKS
YESTERDAY AND TODAY BY THE
ISLAMIC STATE, SEEMINGLY TRYING
TO MAKE A PUSHBACK AGAINST THIS
DEFEAT THEY HAVE SUFFERED IN
RAMADI.
AT THE MOMENT THE IRAQI MILITARY
ARE TELLING US THAT THEY HAVE
MANAGED TO TURN BACK THOSE
ATTACKS, THAT THEY ARE HOLDING
THEIR GROUND.
BUT FOR AWHILE THERE IT DID LOOK
A LITTLE WOBBLY.
AND I THINK THIS IS A REMINDER
THAT ALTHOUGH THEY DID TAKE MOST
OF RAMADI, THAT THE CITY IS
STILL NOT FULLY SECURED.
AND IT'S ALL A BIT DICEY OVER
THERE IN AN BAR STILL.
>> AND THIS STILL MEANS THAT THE
BIGGEST CITY, MOSUL IS IN ISIS
CONTROL.
I MEAN MUCH, MUCH BIGGER THAN
RAMADI, RIGHT?
>> YES, AND REALLY ANY CAMPAIGN
TO TAKE MOSUL BACK IS STILL
REALLY A LONG WAY AWAY.
THAT RAM IDI, WE HAVE SEEN A
FIVE, SIX, SEVEN MONTH BAT TOLL
TAKE BACK THE SMALL PORTION THAT
THEY LODGED LAST SUMMER.
THEY'RE NOT EVEN TALKING ABOUT
MOSS UL NEXT, THEY'RE TALKING ON
TURNING DEEPER INTO ANBAR AND
TRYING TO PUSH OUT THE ISLAMIC
STATE FROM OTHER PARTS OF ANBAR
THAT IT HOLDS, WE'RE A LONG
WAY IN MOSUL.
LIZ SLY, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: ISRAEL HAS
CHARGED TWO JEWISH EXTREMISTS
FOR THE MURDER OF A PALESTINIAN
FAMILY, A CRIME THAT HELPED FUEL
A WAVE OF STREET VIOLENCE IN
ISRAEL IN RECENT MONTHS.
THE MEN WERE INDICTED TODAY WITH
LAST JULY'S ARSON ATTACK ON A
WEST BANK HOME THAT KILLED AN
18-MONTH-OLD BOY AND HIS
PARENTS.
A DEFENSE ATTORNEY SAID THE
ACCUSED, A MINOR AND A 21-YEAR-
OLD, CONFESSED ONLY BECAUSE THEY
WERE TORTURED BY POLICE.
ISRAELI PRIME MINISTER BENJAMIN
NETANYAHU DENIED THAT ACCUSATION
AND SAID THE CASE DEMONSTRATES
ISRAEL WILL APPLY THE LAW TO ALL
CITIZENS IN ALL PARTS OF ISRAEL.
IN THE U.S., A GROUP OF ARMED
MEN HAS TAKEN OVER A FEDERAL
BUILDING IN SOUTHEASTERN OREGON.
THEY OCCUPIED THE HEADQUARTERS
OF THE MALHEUR NATIONAL WILDLIFE
REFUGE YESTERDAY WHEN IT WAS
CLOSED FOR THE WEEKEND.
THE GROUP IS PROTESTING FEDERAL
CONTROL OF SOME LOCAL LAND AND
THE PROSECUTION OF TWO RANCHERS
CONVICTED OF SETTING FIRE TO
PUBLIC LAND IN THE EARLY 2000's.
THE RANCHERS SERVED TIME FOR
ARSON.
THE FATHER, THREE MONTHS, AND
THE SON, ONE YEAR.
BUT A FEDERAL JUDGE RULED THOSE
SENTENCES TOO LENIENT AND
ORDERED THE PAIR BACK TO PRISON
FOR FOUR YEARS STARTING
TOMORROW.
THE RANCHERS SAY THEY SET FIRES
TO PREVENT WILDFIRES AND STOP
THE GROWTH OF INVASIVE PLANTS.
THE HARNEY COUNTY SHERIFF AND
OREGON STATE POLICE SAY THEY'RE
TRYING TO RESOLVE THE SITUATION
PEACEFULLY.
>> Sreenivasan: AS THE NATION'S
BABY BOOMERS REACH THEIR GOLDEN
YEARS, 8,000 AMERICANS HIT THE
LEGAL RETIREMENT AGE OF 66 EVERY
DAY.
ECONOMISTS ARE PREDICTING A
LABOR SHORTAGE PARTICULARLY TO
FILL MIDDLE CLASS, "BLUE COLLAR"
JOBS BEING VACATED IN
MANUFACTURING AND OTHER TRADES,
JOBS THAT REQUIRE A HIGH SCHOOL
DIPLOMA, BUT NOT A COLLEGE
DEGREE.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
WE LOOK AT INVESTMENT IN CAREER
AND TECHNICAL TRAINING AND
WHETHER YOUNGER AMERICANS --
"GENERATION X" AND THE
"MILLENNIAL GENERATION" -- ARE
PREPARED TO FILL THE GAP.
THE NEWSHOUR'S CHRISTOPHER
BOOKER REPORTS ON HOW ONE STATE,
OREGON, IS PLANNING AHEAD.
>> Reporter: WITH THEIR
COVERALLS AND SAFETY SHIELDS,
THESE STUDENTS COULD BE MISTAKEN
FOR EXTRAS IN A POST-WORLD WAR
TWO INDUSTRIAL FILM, RATHER THAN
DIGITAL AGE TEENAGERS.
THE SIGHTS, SOUNDS, AND SMELLS
COMING FROM THIS HIGH SCHOOL
METALS CLASS IN SHERWOOD,
OREGON, LOOK AND FEEL LIKE A
20TH CENTURY FACTORY.
IN SOME WAYS, THIS SCENE IS A
RELIC, BECAUSE IN OREGON, THIS
METALS CLASS AND OTHER CAREER
EDUCATION COURSES OFFERED AT THE
SCHOOL HAVE BECOME RARE.
TERREL SMITH HAS BEEN TEACHING
CAREER TRAINING CLASSES FOR 37
YEARS.
>> THOSE KIND OF COURSES ARE NOT
AVAILABLE TO MOST HIGH SCHOOLS
IN OREGON.
MANY STUDENTS DON'T HAVE THE
OPPORTUNITIES TO EXPERIENCE THIS
CAREER FOCUS, AND GET THEM ON
THAT CAREER TRAINING TRAIN, IF
YOU WILL.
>> Reporter: SMITH SAYS THIS
LACK OF CAREER TRAINING, NOT
ONLY PUTS STUDENTS AT A
DISADVANTAGE, BUT HELPS
CONTRIBUTE TO THE SKILLS GAP
BETWEEN WORKERS AND EMPLOYERS IN
THE OREGON ECONOMY.
>> WE'RE SITTING IN A METAL
MANUFACTURING LAB WHERE THESE
KIDS THAT LEARN THE WELDING AND
THE WORKING WITH THE METAL AND
MANUFACTURING CONCEPTS HERE ARE
GOING TO BE ABLE TO WALK OUT AND
GET FAMILY WAGE JOBS RIGHT OUT
OF HIGH SCHOOL.
AND WE HAVE A WOODS PROGRAM
WHERE THEY'RE LEARNING THE
BUILDING TRADES.
SO WE'RE DOING IT HERE, BUT I
DON'T, WE DON'T SEE IT IN THE
HIGH SCHOOL IN GENERAL.
SO I THINK THAT GAP'S GOING GET
WORSE.
>> Reporter: SMITH'S CONCERN
COMES AT A TIME WHEN OREGON
NEEDS MORE WORKERS IN
MANUFACTURING AND ALSO GROWING
INDUSTRIES HERE LIKE HEALTHCARE
AND PROFESSIONAL BUSINESS
SERVICES.
OVERALL, THE STATE'S JOB GROWTH
RATE IS THREE PERCENT A YEAR--
ONE PERCENT ABOVE THE NATIONAL
AVERAGE.
OREGON IS ALSO CREATING TWICE AS
MANY JOBS NEEDED TO KEEP UP WITH
ITS POPULATION GROWTH.
ANDREW MCGOUGH RUNS WORKSYSTEMS,
A NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATION TRYING
TO IMPROVE THE QUALITY OF THE
PORTLAND AREA WORKFORCE.
>> WE HAVE NO PROBLEM ON THE
UPPER END.
THE CITY OF PORTLAND ITSELF IS
ABOVE 50% OF OUR RESIDENTS HAVE
A BACHELOR'S DEGREE OR ABOVE AND
HIGH SCHOOL AND THE MIDDLE
SKILLS ARE REALLY WHERE WE'RE
PREDOMINANTLY CHALLENGED.
>> Reporter: BY "MIDDLE SKILLS,"
MCGOUGH MEANS OREGON'S BLUE
COLLAR INDUSTRIES LIKE ADVANCED
MANUFACTURING, PRODUCTION AND
METAL FABRICATION.
>> WE HAVE TENS OF THOUSANDS OF
JOBS IN VERY TRADITIONAL
MANUFACTURING AREAS.
THE CHALLENGE IS THAT NEW
WORKERS DON'T APPEAR TO BE ALL
THAT INTERESTED IN THOSE KINDS
OF JOBS.
WE'RE PROJECTING ABOUT 30,000
GROWTH AND REPLACEMENT JOBS OVER
THE COURSE OF THE NEXT TEN
YEARS.
AND THERE IS NO WAY THAT WE'RE
GOING TO FILL THAT THROUGH OUR
TRADITIONAL MEANS.
>> Reporter: THAT'S JUST METAL?
>> THAT'S JUST METALS, YEAH.
BUT THE REAL DEARTH FOR
EMPLOYERS IS ON THE PRODUCTION
SIDE.
THEY JUST CAN'T FIND PEOPLE WHO
ARE SUITED FOR THE KINDS OF
PRODUCTION WORK THAT WE HAVE
AVAILABLE TODAY, AND THAT WE SEE
IN THE NEAR FUTURE.
>> Reporter: LAST SUMMER, TWO-
THIRDS OF OREGON EMPLOYERS
REPORTED TO THE OREGON
EMPLOYMENT DEPARTMENT DIFFICULTY
FILLING JOB VACANCIES, SAYING
THEY WEREN'T RECEIVING ENOUGH
APPLICANTS OR TOO MANY
APPLICANTS LACKED THE NECESSARY
SKILLS.
THIS MISMATCH IS NATIONWIDE.
THE NATIONAL SKILLS COALITION, A
WASHINGTON, D.C. GROUP THAT
ADVOCATES FOR WORKER TRAINING,
SAYS WHILE 15% OF U.S. JOBS ARE
LOW SKILLED, AND 31% ARE HIGH
SKILLED, 54% ARE MIDDLE SKILLED.
BUT ONLY 44% OF THE COUNTRY'S
WORKERS ARE TRAINED IN THOSE
MIDDLE SKILLS, A 10% GAP.
OREGON'S SKILLS GAP IS BETTER
THAN THE NATIONAL AVERAGE, ONLY
FOUR PERCENT.
BUT SOME STATES HAVE A MUCH
GREATER GAP.
FOR EXAMPLE, ALABAMA, 13%, AND
NEW JERSEY, 15%.
OREGON HAS SOMETIMES GOTTEN
CREATIVE IN ITS RESPONSE.
WITH A NEARLY $500,000 GRANT,
SHERWOOD HIGH SCHOOL TEACHER
JOHN NIEBERGALL DRIVES AROUND
THE STATE IN A MOTORHOME.
DELIVERING SCANNERS, LASER
CUTTERS, AND 3D PRINTERS,
NIEBERGALL WORKS WITH TEACHERS
LOOKING TO DEVELOP OR EXPAND
CAREER CURRICULUM FOR THEIR
SCHOOLS.
>> INDUSTRY'S REALIZING THOSE
BABY BOOMERS ARE RETIRING, AND
WE HAVE TO FILL THE PIPELINE. I
WANT 23, 24-YEAR-OLDS THAT CAN
BUY A HOUSE, BECAUSE THEY HAVE A
LIVING-WAGE CAREER, AND I THINK
THIS FIELD OF ADVANCED
MANUFACTURING HAS THOSE
OPPORTUNITIES.
>> Reporter: NIEBERGALL'S GRANT
CAME FROM A STATE FUND
ESTABLISHED FOR CAREER AND
TECHNICAL EDUCATION
REVITALIZATION.
KNOWN AS THE C.T.E. GRANT, THE
FUND WAS ESTABLISHED IN 2011,
AND HAS SO FAR DISTRIBUTED ABOUT
$22 MILLION.
BUT ACCORDING TO AN ANALYSIS BY
"THE OREGONIAN" NEWSPAPER,
STATEWIDE, ABOUT 61% OF GRANT
APPLICATIONS WERE NOT FUNDED AND
MORE THAN HALF OF ALL OREGON
MIDDLE AND HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS
HAD NO ACCESS TO PROGRAMS LAST
YEAR.
OREGON GOVERNOR KATE BROWN WANTS
TO CHANGE THAT.
>> I'M OUT TRAVELING AND MEETING
WITH OREGON BUSINESS PEOPLE, THE
FIRST QUESTION THAT I ASK THEM
IS, "WHAT IS THE BIGGEST
CHALLENGE THAT YOU FACE?"
AND INEVITABLY, THEY TELL ME
THAT THE BIGGEST CHALLENGE IS
HAVING A TALENTED, DIVERSE WORK
POOL TO HIRE FROM.
>> Reporter: IN JULY, GOVERNOR
BROWN SIGNED A BILL AUTHORIZING
$35 MILLION IN SPENDING FOR
CAREER AND TECHNICAL EDUCATION,
NEARLY DOUBLING THE STATE'S
INVESTMENT.
WHEN WE SPENT OUR DAY WITH
SHERWOOD HIGH SCHOOL, ONE OF THE
TEACHERS SAID TO US THAT HE
ACTUALLY VIEWS THIS, THIS NEED
AND THIS PUSH AS A SOCIAL
JUSTICE ISSUE.
DO YOU AGREE?
>> OH, TOTALLY, ABSOLUTELY.
IT PROVIDES CAREER OPTIONS FOR
STUDENTS WHO DON'T NECESSARILY
HAVE THEM RIGHT NOW.
WE WANT OUR STUDENTS TO GRADUATE
FROM HIGH SCHOOL, BUT WE WANT
THEM TO GRADUATE WITH A PLAN,
WHETHER IT'S COLLEGE OR CAREER.
AND CAREER AND TECHNICAL ED
OPENS ALL NUMEROUS POSSIBILITIES
FOR OUR STUDENTS.
>> Reporter: WHILE GOVERNOR
BROWN SAYS SHE PLANS TO PRESS
THE STATE LEGISLATURE FOR
PERMANENT C.T.E. FUNDING, THE
PACIFIC NORTHWEST CARPENTERS
UNION IS PREPARING FOR BABY
BOOMER RETIREMENT.
ESTIMATING THAT 40% OF ITS
CARPENTERS WILL RETIRE IN THE
NEXT DECADE, THE UNION HAS BEEN
RECRUITING YOUNG PEOPLE TO SHORE
UP ITS RANKS.
JENNIFER YOST HAS BEEN A
CARPENTER APPRENTICE FOR THREE
YEARS.
WHEN SHE FINISHES HER
APPRENTICESHIP NEXT YEAR, SHE
WILL BE A PILE DRIVER WORKING IN
MARINE CONSTRUCTION.
>> FULL SCALE FOR PILE DRIVERS
IN OUR AREA IS $35.77 AN HOUR,
PLUS YOU GET VACATION PAY, YOU
HAVE HEALTH INSURANCE, WHICH IS
SOMETHING FOR ME WAS HUGE, AND
YOU HAVE A PENSION.
ONCE YOU'RE VESTED AFTER FIVE
YEARS, YOU DRAW INTO A PENSION.
>> Reporter: YOST FOLLOWED A
CIRCUITOUS ROUTE TO THE
PROFESSION, TAKING A HANDFUL OF
COLLEGE COURSES AFTER HIGH
SCHOOL, THEN WORKING IN CUSTOMER
SERVICE, BEFORE HER UNCLE
ENCOURAGED HER TO THINK ABOUT
PURSUING A TRADE.
>> I CAME INTO THE
APPRENTICESHIP WHEN I WAS 33.
AND I WISH I WOULD HAVE KNOWN
ABOUT IT RIGHT OUT OF SCHOOL,
YOU KNOW?
JUST SO I COULD HAVE TAKEN
ADVANTAGE OF IT THEN AND HAD ALL
THESE YEARS REINVESTED.
>> Reporter: AS ONE OF 842 AREA
APPRENTICES, YOST SAYS, UNLIKE
MANY OF HER FRIENDS, THE UNION
APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM PROVIDED
A PATH TO A DEBT-FREE EDUCATION.
>> THIS IS THE FIRST TIME THAT I
FEEL LIKE I'VE BEEN ABLE TO WORK
A JOB WHERE I CAN HELP OTHERS
INSTEAD OF HAVING TO ASK FOR
HELP.
LIKE, I'M SELF-SUSTAINING.
>> Reporter: THIS 60 ACRE
FACILITY ALONG THE WILLAMETTE
RIVER, IS WHERE ONE OF OREGON'S
LONG-TIME EMPLOYERS, VIGOR
INDUSTRIAL, HAS OVER 1,000
SKILLED WORKERS, FROM PIPE
FITTERS TO WELDERS, VIGOR BUILDS
SHIPS AND REPAIRS SOME OF THE
LARGEST VESSELS IN THE WORLD.
FRANK FOTI IS THE C.E.O.
>> THE INDUSTRIAL WORKER OF
TODAY THAT SORT OF LOOKS NEARLY
EXTINCT IN THE U.S. MAY BE ONE
OF THE MOST PRIZED ASSETS WE
HAVE IN A VERY SHORT PERIOD OF
TIME.
>> Reporter: VIGOR SAYS THE
AVERAGE AGE OF THE PORTLAND
WORKFORCE IS 42, AND THE COMPANY
SAYS ITS IS PERPETUALLY
RECRUITING, OFFERING AFTER
SCHOOL PROGRAMS FOR HIGH SCHOOL
STUDENTS AND PARTNERSHIPS WITH
COMMUNITY COLLEGES.
RECENT HIGH SCHOOL GRADUATE ZAC
CLAYVILLE WORKS ON VIGOR'S
PORTLAND YARD AS A TOOL ROOM
ATTENDANT.
>> I DIDN'T KNOW WHAT I WANTED
TO DO OR I JUST DIDN'T WANT TO
SIT AROUND, LIKE IN AN OFFICE
JOB.
>> Reporter: ZAC LEARNED ABOUT
VIGOR THROUGH AN AFTER SCHOOL
PROGRAM CALLED PATHWAYS TO
MANUFACTURING.
>> EVERYONE'S THOUGHTS AT LEAST
IN HIGH SCHOOL IS, "I'M GOING TO
GO OUT THERE.
I'M GOING TO WORK MY ASS OFF.
AND I'M GOING TO MAKE NOTHING
DOING IT.
I MIGHT AS WELL GO FLIP A BURGER
INSTEAD OF SWING A HAMMER; MUCH
EASIER, FOR THE SAME PRICE."
BUT NOT MANY PEOPLE REALIZE THAT
THERE ARE REALLY WELL-PAYING
JOBS DOWN HERE.
>> Reporter: FOTI SAYS IT IS
THIS VERY NARRATIVE THAT WILL
ULTIMATELY NEED TO CHANGE IF THE
STATE AND THE BUSINESSES WORKING
IN THE STATE, HOPE TO ENTICE THE
NEXT GENERATION OF WORKERS TO
THE TRADES.
>> I MEAN, THESE ARE HUGE
EARNING JOBS.
THIS IS PEOPLE THAT YOU ARE
SEEING HERE WITH THEIR HARD HATS
AND SAFETY VESTS ON ARE IN THE
$50,000 TO $100,000 A YEAR
RANGE.
THE JOBS ARE INTERESTING.
THEY'RE SAFE.
AND YOU WALK AWAY SAYING, "I
MADE THIS."
AND THERE ARE SO FEW THINGS THAT
WE GET TO SAY THAT ABOUT IN OUR
COUNTRY TODAY.
>> Sreenivasan: THE GROWING
POPULARITY OF "CRITICAL ACCESS"
HOSPITALS -- SMALL HOSPITALS IN
MOSTLY RURAL AREAS -- IS POSING
A DILEMMA FOR PEOPLE NEEDING OR
WANTING SURGERY.
FOR MANY IN THOSE AREAS, THESE
HOSPITALS MAY BE MORE
CONVENIENT.
BUT A "WALL STREET JOURNAL"
INVESTIGATION HAS FOUND THE RISK
OF SERIOUS OR FATAL
COMPLICATIONS DURING MAJOR
ORTHOPEDIC SURGERY IS GREATER
THERE THAN AT A GENERAL
HOSPITAL.
CHRISTOPHER WEAVER IS ONE OF THE
REPORTERS ON THAT STORY, AND HE
JOINS ME NOW TO DISCUSS IT.
SO WHAT'S THE PROBLEM THAT'S
HAPPENING?
>> SO THE HOSPITALS ARE DOING
MORE AND MORE, A PROCEDURE THAT
IS LUCRATIVE FOR ALMOST ANY KIND
OF HOSPITAL.
HIP AND KNEE REPLACEMENTS FOR
IN-PATIENTS.
THE PROBLEM IS THEY'RE NOT DOING
IT ENOUGH MORE TO BE AS GOOD AS
IT AS BIGGER HOSPITALS THAT HAVE
MUCH LOWER RATES OF PEOPLE DYING
AFTER THE SURGERIES.
>> SO USUALLY YOU THINK THE MORE
YOU DO, THE BETTER YOU GET AT T
THE LOWER COMPLICATIONS, RIGHT?
>> SURE.
SO THE AVERAGE IN 2013, THE
AVERAGE CRITICAL ACCESS HOSPITAL
WAS DOING ABOUT 26 OF THESE
PROCEDURES A YEAR.
THAT IS ABOUT 130 I THINK FOR
GENERAL HOSPITALS.
THE EXPERTS SAY THE SAFEST
HOSPITALS DO ABOUT A HUNDRED.
AND EVEN AS THEY ARE GROWING,
YOU WOULD THINK THAT WOULD LEAD
TO BETTER OUTCOMES BUT SOME ARE
GROWING FROM TWO, THREE, FIVE A
YEAR TO LIKE 13 OR 12 AND
EXPERTS SAY IT'S JUST NOT ENOUGH
TO DO THEM WELL
>> Sreenivasan: AND WHAT ARE
WE TALKING ABOUT IN TERMS OF
OUTCOMES.
HOW MUCH MORE DANGEROUS IS IT?
>> WE ASKED SOME RESEARCHERS AT
HARVARD TO HELP US FIGURE THAT
OUT.
YOU NEED TO ADJUST FOR THINGS
LIKE MAYBE PATIENTS MIGHT BE
SICKER IN RURAL AREAS OR OLDER.
>> AND WHAT THEY FOUND.
>> THE FINDS ARE I THINK IT WAS
ABOUT A NINE IN A THOUSAND
PEOPLE DIE WITHIN 30 DAYS OF
GETTING ONE OF THESE PROCEDURES
AT A CRITICAL ACCESS HOSPITAL.
THAT IS ALMOST 80% MORE THAN AT
A TYPICAL GENERAL HOSPITAL WHERE
THE RATES ARE ABOUT 5 PER 1,000
>> Sreenivasan: SO WHY ARE
THESE HOSPITALS IN THESE
CRITICAL ACCESS OR RURAL AREAS
DOING THIS AND SPECIALIZING IN
THIS.
I THINK OF A RURAL HOSPITAL AND
SAY MAYBE I'M JUST THE NUTS AND
BOLTS MAKING SURE YOU ARE OKAY
FROM A HEART ATTACK AND A COLD,
NOT SPECIFICALLY A HIP OR KNEE
REPLACEMENT.
>> SURE.
SO IN THE LATE '90S, CONGRESS
SET UP A DIFFERENT WAY TO PAY
THESE CRITICAL ACCESS HOSPITALS
COMPARED TO YOUR TYPICAL YOUR
TOWN MEMORIAL, RIGHT.
THE CRIT CAM ACCESS HOSPITALS
GET PAID BASED ON THEIR COSTS,
101% OF THEIR COSTS BY MEDICARE.
THE RESULT IS THAT THEY'RE DOING
LUCRATIVE PROCEDURES LIKE HIP
REPLACEMENT RESULTS IN BIGGER
AMOUNT OF MONEY TO THEM THAN IT
MIGHT TO A TYPICAL GENERAL
HOSPITAL, THEY GET PAID A FLAT
RATE FOR DOING EACH CASE
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT IS THE
RECOURSE HERE?
IS THERE A WAY TO UNDO THIS?
>> YOU KNOW, IT'S TOUGH BECAUSE
THESE PLACES ARE OFTEN SORT OF
THE ONLY HOSPITAL IN THE A LOCAL
SERVICE AREA.
AND MEDICARE NEEDS TO BALANCE
THE FACT THAT THEY WANT PEOPLE
TO BE ABLE TO HAVE ACCESS TO
EMERGENCY TREATMENT FOR THINGS
LIKE HEART ATTACKS, WITH THEIR
CONCERNS WHICH THEY SEEM TO
SHARE, RIGHT, ABOUT THE KINDS OF
PATTERNS THAT WE'RE SEEING AND
QUALITY AND THE KINDS THAT
HOSPITALS ARE PERFORMING.
SOME EXPERTS SUGGEST THAT MAYBE
THEY SHOULD GET A SPECIAL
PAYMENT ONLY FOR THOSE KINDS OF
EMERGENCY PROCEDURES THAT THE
PUBLIC WOULD WANT TO HAVE THERE,
RIGHT.
AND THEN NOT FOR PERHAPS
ELECTIVE PROCEDURES THAT
PATIENTS MIGHT BE BETTER SERVED
TO GET AT BIGGER HOSPITALS
SOMEWHERE ELSE.
>> THANKS SO MUCH FOR JOINING
US.
>> SURE.
-- FOR JOINING US.
>> Sreenivasan: THE BRITISH
PERIOD DRAMA "DOWNTON ABBEY"
BEGINS ITS SIXTH AND FINAL
SEASON TONIGHT ON PBS.
THE MOST HIGHLY WATCHED DRAMA
EVER SHOWN ON THE NETWORK, IT'S
BEEN NOMINATED FOR "OUTSTANDING
DRAMA SERIES" IN THE PRIMETIME
EMMY AWARDS EACH OF THE PAST
FOUR SEASONS.
THE NEWSHOUR RECENTLY CAUGHT UP
WITH SOME OF THE CAST.
>> HUGH BONNEVILLE, I PLAY
ROBERT CROWLEY IN DOWNTOWN
ABBEY, I'M A SCORPIO.
>> I'M PHYLLIS LOGAN AND I PLAY
MRS. HUGHES IN DOWNTON ABBEY.
>> MY NAME IS ALLEN LEACH AND I
PLAY TOM.
>> I'M KEVIN DOYLE, I PLAY
MOLESLEY.
>> THE SINGLE WORD THAT
DESCRIBES MY CHARACTER-- THAT'S
A TRICKY ONE, ACTUALLY.
>> HONESTY.
>> FRAGILE.
>> DADDY.
>> I THINK IT WOULD PROBABLY
HAVE TO BE SINCERE.
>> TOM HAS GROWN MASSIVELY AS A
CHARACTER.
HE'S GONE FROM BEING A VERY
STRONG SOCIALIST, WITH STRONG
AND HARD VIEWS AGAINST THE
ARISTOCRACY TO A PERSON WHO HAS
BEEN ABLE TO BREAK DOWN THOSE
BARRIERS AND SEE THEM AS PEOPLE
RATHER THAN JUST A STEREOTYPE.
>> THE CHARACTER ROBERT CROWLEY
HAS GROWN BY ABOUT THREE INCHES
AROUND THE WAIST.
>> HE'S DEVELOPED FROM BEING I
WOULD SAY COMIC RELIEF, A FIGURE
OF FUN TO A MORE ROUNDED,
RECOGNIZABLE HUMAN BEING.
>> WELL, SHE HAS CERTAINLY GROWN
IN AS MUCH AS SHE SEEMS TO HAVE
ATTRACTED THE EYE OF MR. CARSON,
THE BUTLER, SO SHE CERTAINLY
DEVELOPED A ROMANTIC LIFE
THROUGHOUT THE SEASONS.
SO THAT IS NICE FOR HER.
>> THE CHARACTER ROBERT CROWLEY
HAS GROWN INCREMENTALLY AT THE
PACE OF A GLACIER OVER SIX
SEASONS TO BECOME A MORE
TOLERANT AND MORE COMPASSIONATE
HUMAN BEING.
>> I THINK SHE HAS-- SHE'S A
VERY FAIR PERSON.
AND HAS A WARM HEART.
AND BUT SHE CAN... SHE IS HER
OWN WOMAN, LET'S SAY THAT.
SHE DEFINITELY DOESN'T TAKE
ANY-- FROM OTHER PEOPLE.
SHE IS HER OWN WOMAN.
>> THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SUNDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR MORE ON
THE OCCUPATION OF A FEDERAL
BUILDING IN SOUTH EASTERN OREGON
WE'RE JOINED BY AMELIA
TEMPLETON, A REPORTER FOR OREGON
PUBLIC BROADCASTING.
WHAT CAN YOU TELL US ABOUT WHAT
IS HAPPENING THERE?
>> I MET BRIEFLY WITH SOME OF
THE MILITIAMEN WHO WERE
OCCUPYING THE SITE.
I COULDN'T ACTUALLY TELL IF THEY
HAD MADE IT INSIDE THE BUILDING
OR WERE JUST GATHERED OUTSIDE.
BUT A SMALL BON FIRE.
>> WHAT HAS BEEN HAPPENING THIS
MORNING?
>> WELL, THIS MORNING THE SON OF
NEVADA RANCHER BUNDY HAS HELD A
PRESS CONFERENCE.
HE'S THE GROUP SPOKESPERSON.
WE HAVE HEARD THAT SO FAR THERE
REALLY HASN'T BEEN ANY LAW
ENFORCEMENT PRESENCE AT THE
SITE.
LAST NIGHT I SAW OREGON STATE
POLICE CARS ACTUALLY DRIVING
AWAY FROM THE AREA
>> Sreenivasan: HAVE YOU HEARD
FROM LOCAL AUTHORITIES ON WHY
THEY'RE NOT PRESENT AT THE SITE?
>> WELL, IT'S A VERY REMOTE
SITE.
IT'S ABOUT HALF AN HOUR SOUTH OF
BYRNE IN THE MIDDLE OF A
WILDLIFE REFUGE.
IT WAS OCCUPIED OVER A WEEKEND.
THERE WAS ACTUALLY NOBODY THERE
AT THE TIME.
AND IT SEEMS LIKE THE LOCAL
AUTHORITIES ARE TRYING TO AVOID
A CONFRONTATION ALTHOUGH THEY
HAVEN'T SAID THAT DIRECTLY
>> Sreenivasan: IN THAT PRESS
CONFERENCE WERE THERE A LIST OF
DEMANDS?
IS THERE SOMETHING THAT BUNDY
WANTED?
>> GENERALLY THEY SAID THEY ARE
SUING SUPPORT FOR A PAIR OF
RANCHERS HERE HO ARE DUE TO TURN
THEMSELVES IN TO SERVE A FEDERAL
PRISON SENTENCE MONDAY FOR
ARSON.
THEY ALSO SAID THAT THEY
ESSENTIALLY WANT TO TAKE BACK
FEDERAL LAND.
AND THAT THAT LAND SHOULD BELONG
TO THE PEOPLE.
THAT IT'S BEEN TAKEN FROM
RANCHERS AND LOGGERS AND THEY
WANT TO SEE IT RETURNED.
>> A PEOPLE-- AMELIA TEMPLETON,
FROM OREGON PUBLIC BROADCASTING,
THANKS SO MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> YOU'RE WELCOME.
>> NOW AFTER A TWO WEEK HOLIDAY
PRESIDENT OBAMA IS BACK IN
WASHINGTON.
THE PRESIDENT, FIRST LADY AND
THEIR TWO DAUGHTERS RETURNED
TODAY FROM THEIR ANNUAL VACATION
IN THE PRESIDENT'S HOME STATE OF
HAWAII.
THE PRESIDENT MEETS WITH HIS
ATTORNEY GENERAL TOMORROW TO
PREPARE EXECUTIVE ORDERS ON GUN
CONTROL.
AND ON THURSDAY WILL PARTICIPATE
IN A TOWN HALL ON GUNS TELEVISED
NATIONALLY BY CNN.
MONDAY ON THE NEWSHOUR VETERANS
WHO FOUGHT IN IRAQ AND
AFGHANISTAN ARE TRYING TO START
FAMILIES AND PRESSING THE
GOVERNMENT TO PAY FOR THEIR
FERTILITY TREATMENTS.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
THANKS FOR WATCHING, I'M HARI
SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.